The subject of the Bhagavad-gétä entails the comprehension of five basic
truths. First of all, the science of God is explained and then the constitutional
position of the living entities, jévas. There is éçvara, which means the
controller, and there are jévas, the living entities which are controlled. If a
living entity says that he is not controlled but that he is free, then he is insane.
The living being is controlled in every respect, at least in his conditioned life.
So in the Bhagavad-gétä the subject matter deals with the éçvara, the supreme
controller, and the jévas, the controlled living entities. Prakåti (material
nature) and time (the duration of existence of the whole universe or the
manifestation of material nature) and karma (activity) are also discussed. The
cosmic manifestation is full of different activities. All living entities are
engaged in different activities. From Bhagavad-gétä we must learn what God is,
what the living entities are, what prakåti is, what the cosmic manifestation is,
how it is controlled by time, and what the activities of the living entities are.
Out of these five basic subject matters in Bhagavad-gétä it is established that
the Supreme Godhead, or Kåñëa, or Brahman, or the supreme controller, or
Paramätmä—you may use whatever name you like—is the greatest of all. The
living beings are in quality like the supreme controller. For instance, the Lord
has control over the universal affairs of material nature, as will be explained in
the later chapters of Bhagavad-gétä. Material nature is not independent. She is
acting under the directions of the Supreme Lord. As Lord Kåñëa says,
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sa-caräcaram: “This material nature is working
under My direction.” When we see wonderful things happening in the cosmic
nature, we should know that behind this cosmic manifestation there is a
controller. Nothing could be manifested without being controlled. It is childish
not to consider the controller. For instance, a child may think that an
automobile is quite wonderful to be able to run without a horse or other animal
pulling it, but a sane man knows the nature of the automobile’s engineering
arrangement. He always knows that behind the machinery there is a man, a
driver. Similarly, the Supreme Lord is the driver under whose direction
everything is working. Now the jévas, or the living entities, have been accepted
by the Lord, as we will note in the later chapters, as His parts and parcels. A
particle of gold is also gold, a drop of water from the ocean is also salty, and
similarly we the living entities, being part and parcel of the supreme

controller, éçvara, or Bhagavän, Lord Çré Kåñëa, have all the qualities of the
Supreme Lord in minute quantity because we are minute éçvaras, subordinate
éçvaras. We are trying to control nature, as presently we are trying to control
space or planets, and this tendency to control is there because it is in Kåñëa.
But although we have a tendency to lord it over material nature, we should
know that we are not the supreme controller. This is explained in
Bhagavad-gétä.
What is material nature? This is also explained in Gétä as inferior prakåti,
inferior nature. The living entity is explained as the superior prakåti. Prakåti is
always under control, whether inferior or superior. Prakåti is female, and she is
controlled by the Lord just as the activities of a wife are controlled by the
husband. Prakåti is always subordinate, predominated by the Lord, who is the
predominator. The living entities and material nature are both predominated,
controlled by the Supreme Lord. According to the Gétä, the living entities,
although parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, are to be considered prakåti.
This is clearly mentioned in the Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä. Apareyam
itas tv anyäà prakåtià viddhi me paräm/ jéva-bhütäm: “This material nature is
My inferior prakåti, but beyond this is another prakåti—jéva-bhütäm, the living
entity.”
Material nature itself is constituted by three qualities: the mode of
goodness, the mode of passion and the mode of ignorance. Above these modes
there is eternal time, and by a combination of these modes of nature and under
the control and purview of eternal time there are activities, which are called
karma. These activities are being carried out from time immemorial, and we
are suffering or enjoying the fruits of our activities. For instance, suppose I am
a businessman and have worked very hard with intelligence and have amassed
a great bank balance. Then I am an enjoyer. But then say I have lost all my
money in business; then I am a sufferer. Similarly, in every field of life we
enjoy the results of our work, or we suffer the results. This is called karma.
Éçvara (the Supreme Lord), jéva (the living entity), prakåti (nature), käla
(eternal time) and karma (activity) are all explained in the Bhagavad-gétä. Out
of these five, the Lord, the living entities, material nature and time are eternal.
The manifestation of prakåti may be temporary, but it is not false. Some

philosophers say that the manifestation of material nature is false, but
according to the philosophy of Bhagavad-gétä or according to the philosophy of
the Vaiñëavas, this is not so. The manifestation of the world is not accepted as
false; it is accepted as real, but temporary. It is likened unto a cloud which
moves across the sky, or the coming of the rainy season, which nourishes
grains. As soon as the rainy season is over and as soon as the cloud goes away,
all the crops which were nourished by the rain dry up. Similarly, this material
manifestation takes place at a certain interval, stays for a while and then
disappears. Such are the workings of prakåti. But this cycle is working
eternally. Therefore prakåti is eternal; it is not false. The Lord refers to this as
“My prakåti.” This material nature is the separated energy of the Supreme
Lord, and similarly the living entities are also the energy of the Supreme Lord,
although they are not separated but eternally related. So the Lord, the living
entity, material nature and time are all interrelated and are all eternal.
However, the other item, karma, is not eternal. The effects of karma may be
very old indeed. We are suffering or enjoying the results of our activities from
time immemorial, but we can change the results of our karma, or our activity,
and this change depends on the perfection of our knowledge. We are engaged
in various activities. Undoubtedly we do not know what sort of activities we
should adopt to gain relief from the actions and reactions of all these activities,
but this is also explained in the Bhagavad-gétä.
The position of éçvara, the Supreme Lord, is that of supreme consciousness.
The jévas, or the living entities, being parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord,
are also conscious. Both the living entity and material nature are explained as
prakåti, the energy of the Supreme Lord, but one of the two, the jéva, is
conscious. The other prakåti is not conscious. That is the difference. Therefore
the jéva-prakåti is called superior because the jéva has consciousness which is
similar to the Lord’s. The Lord’s is supreme consciousness, however, and one
should not claim that the jéva, the living entity, is also supremely conscious.
The living being cannot be supremely conscious at any stage of his perfection,
and the theory that he can be so is a misleading theory. Conscious he may be,
but he is not perfectly or supremely conscious.
The distinction between the jéva and the éçvara will be explained in the

Thirteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä. The Lord is kñetra-jïa, conscious, as is
the living being, but the living being is conscious of his particular body,
whereas the Lord is conscious of all bodies. Because He lives in the heart of
every living being, He is conscious of the psychic movements of the particular
jévas. We should not forget this. It is also explained that the Paramätmä, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, is living in everyone’s heart as éçvara, as the
controller, and that He is giving directions for the living entity to act as he
desires. The living entity forgets what to do. First of all he makes a
determination to act in a certain way, and then he is entangled in the actions
and reactions of his own karma. After giving up one type of body, he enters
another type of body, as we put on and take off clothes. As the soul thus
migrates, he suffers the actions and reactions of his past activities. These
activities can be changed when the living being is in the mode of goodness, in
sanity, and understands what sort of activities he should adopt. If he does so,
then all the actions and reactions of his past activities can be changed.
Consequently, karma is not eternal. Therefore we stated that of the five items
(éçvara, jéva, prakåti, time and karma) four are eternal, whereas karma is not
eternal.
The supreme conscious éçvara is similar to the living entity in this way: both
the consciousness of the Lord and that of the living entity are transcendental.
It is not that consciousness is generated by the association of matter. That is a
mistaken idea. The theory that consciousness develops under certain
circumstances of material combination is not accepted in the Bhagavad-gétä.
Consciousness may be pervertedly reflected by the covering of material
circumstances, just as light reflected through colored glass may appear to be a
certain color, but the consciousness of the Lord is not materially affected. Lord
Kåñëa says, mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù [Bg. 9.10]. When He descends into the
material universe, His consciousness is not materially affected. If He were so
affected, He would be unfit to speak on transcendental matters as He does in
the Bhagavad-gétä. One cannot say anything about the transcendental world
without being free from materially contaminated consciousness. So the Lord is
not materially contaminated. Our consciousness, at the present moment,
however, is materially contaminated. The Bhagavad-gétä teaches that we have

to purify this materially contaminated consciousness. In pure consciousness,
our actions will be dovetailed to the will of éçvara, and that will make us happy.
It is not that we have to cease all activities. Rather, our activities are to be
purified, and purified activities are called bhakti. Activities in bhakti appear to
be like ordinary activities, but they are not contaminated. An ignorant person
may see that a devotee is acting or working like an ordinary man, but such a
person with a poor fund of knowledge does not know that the activities of the
devotee or of the Lord are not contaminated by impure consciousness or
matter. They are transcendental to the three modes of nature. We should
know, however, that at this point our consciousness is contaminated.
When we are materially contaminated, we are called conditioned. False
consciousness is exhibited under the impression that I am a product of material
nature. This is called false ego. One who is absorbed in the thought of bodily
conceptions cannot understand his situation. Bhagavad-gétä was spoken to
liberate one from the bodily conception of life, and Arjuna put himself in this
position in order to receive this information from the Lord. One must become
free from the bodily conception of life; that is the preliminary activity for the
transcendentalist. One who wants to become free, who wants to become
liberated, must first of all learn that he is not this material body. Mukti, or
liberation, means freedom from material consciousness. In the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam also the definition of liberation is given. Muktir
hitvänyathä-rüpaà svarüpeëa vyavasthitiù: mukti means liberation from the
contaminated consciousness of this material world and situation in pure
consciousness. All the instructions of Bhagavad-gétä are intended to awaken
this pure consciousness, and therefore we find at the last stage of the Gétä’s
instructions that Kåñëa is asking Arjuna whether he is now in purified
consciousness. Purified consciousness means acting in accordance with the
instructions of the Lord. This is the whole sum and substance of purified
consciousness. Consciousness is already there because we are part and parcel of
the Lord, but for us there is the affinity of being affected by the inferior
modes. But the Lord, being the Supreme, is never affected. That is the
difference between the Supreme Lord and the small individual souls.
What is this consciousness? This consciousness is “I am.” Then what am I?

In contaminated consciousness “I am” means “I am the lord of all I survey. I am
the enjoyer.” The world revolves because every living being thinks that he is
the lord and creator of the material world. Material consciousness has two
psychic divisions. One is that I am the creator, and the other is that I am the
enjoyer. But actually the Supreme Lord is both the creator and the enjoyer,
and the living entity, being part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, is neither the
creator nor the enjoyer, but a cooperator. He is the created and the enjoyed.
For instance, a part of a machine cooperates with the whole machine; a part of
the body cooperates with the whole body. The hands, legs, eyes, and so on are
all parts of the body, but they are not actually the enjoyers. The stomach is the
enjoyer. The legs move, the hands supply food, the teeth chew, and all parts of
the body are engaged in satisfying the stomach because the stomach is the
principal factor that nourishes the body’s organization. Therefore everything is
given to the stomach. One nourishes the tree by watering its root, and one
nourishes the body by feeding the stomach, for if the body is to be kept in a
healthy state, then the parts of the body must cooperate to feed the stomach.
Similarly, the Supreme Lord is the enjoyer and the creator, and we, as
subordinate living beings, are meant to cooperate to satisfy Him. This
cooperation will actually help us, just as food taken by the stomach will help all
other parts of the body. If the fingers of the hand think that they should take
the food themselves instead of giving it to the stomach, then they will be
frustrated. The central figure of creation and of enjoyment is the Supreme
Lord, and the living entities are cooperators. By cooperation they enjoy. The
relation is also like that of the master and the servant. If the master is fully
satisfied, then the servant is satisfied. Similarly, the Supreme Lord should be
satisfied, although the tendency to become the creator and the tendency to
enjoy the material world are there also in the living entities because these
tendencies are there in the Supreme Lord who has created the manifested
cosmic world.
We shall find, therefore, in this Bhagavad-gétä that the complete whole is
comprised of the supreme controller, the controlled living entities, the cosmic
manifestation, eternal time and karma, or activities, and all of these are
explained in this text. All of these taken completely form the complete whole,

and the complete whole is called the Supreme Absolute Truth. The complete
whole and the complete Absolute Truth are the complete Personality of
Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. All manifestations are due to His different energies. He is
the complete whole.
It is also explained in the Gétä that impersonal Brahman is also subordinate
to the complete Supreme Person (brahmaëo hi pratiñöhäham). Brahman is more
explicitly explained in the Brahma-sütra to be like the rays of the sunshine.
The impersonal Brahman is the shining rays of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Impersonal Brahman is incomplete realization of the absolute whole,
and so also is the conception of Paramätmä. In the Fifteenth Chapter it shall
be seen that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Puruñottama, is above both
impersonal Brahman and the partial realization of Paramätmä. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is called sac-cid-änanda-vigraha. The Brahma-saàhitä
begins in this way: éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù/ anädir ädir
govindaù sarva-käraëa-käraëam. “Govinda, Kåñëa, is the cause of all causes. He
is the primal cause, and He is the very form of eternity, knowledge and bliss.”
Impersonal Brahman realization is the realization of His sat (eternity) feature.
Paramätmä realization is the realization of sat-cit (eternal knowledge). But
realization of the Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is realization of all the
transcendental features: sat, cit and änanda (eternity, knowledge, and bliss) in
complete vigraha (form).
People with less intelligence consider the Supreme Truth to be impersonal,
but He is a transcendental person, and this is confirmed in all Vedic
literatures. Nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm. (Kaöha Upaniñad 2.2.13) As we
are all individual living beings and have our individuality, the Supreme
Absolute Truth is also, in the ultimate issue, a person, and realization of the
Personality of Godhead is realization of all of the transcendental features in
His complete form. The complete whole is not formless. If He is formless, or if
He is less than any other thing, then He cannot be the complete whole. The
complete whole must have everything within our experience and beyond our
experience, otherwise it cannot be complete.
The complete whole, Personality of Godhead, has immense potencies
(paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate). How Kåñëa is acting in different potencies is

also explained in Bhagavad-gétä. This phenomenal world or material world in
which we are placed is also complete in itself because the twenty-four elements
of which this material universe is a temporary manifestation, according to
Säìkhya philosophy, are completely adjusted to produce complete resources
which are necessary for the maintenance and subsistence of this universe.
There is nothing extraneous, nor is there anything needed. This manifestation
has its own time fixed by the energy of the supreme whole, and when its time
is complete, these temporary manifestations will be annihilated by the
complete arrangement of the complete. There is complete facility for the small
complete units, namely the living entities, to realize the complete, and all sorts
of incompleteness are experienced due to incomplete knowledge of the
complete. So Bhagavad-gétä contains the complete knowledge of Vedic wisdom.
All Vedic knowledge is infallible, and Hindus accept Vedic knowledge to be
complete and infallible. For example, cow dung is the stool of an animal, and
according to småti, or Vedic injunction, if one touches the stool of an animal
he has to take a bath to purify himself. But in the Vedic scriptures cow dung is
considered to be a purifying agent. One might consider this to be
contradictory, but it is accepted because it is Vedic injunction, and indeed by
accepting this, one will not commit a mistake; subsequently it has been proved
by modern science that cow dung contains all antiseptic properties. So Vedic
knowledge is complete because it is above all doubts and mistakes, and
Bhagavad-gétä is the essence of all Vedic knowledge.
Vedic knowledge is not a question of research. Our research work is
imperfect because we are researching things with imperfect senses. We have to
accept perfect knowledge which comes down, as is stated in Bhagavad-gétä, by
the paramparä (disciplic succession). We have to receive knowledge from the
proper source in disciplic succession beginning with the supreme spiritual
master, the Lord Himself, and handed down to a succession of spiritual
masters. Arjuna, the student who took lessons from Lord Çré Kåñëa, accepts
everything that He says without contradicting Him. One is not allowed to
accept one portion of Bhagavad-gétä and not another. No. We must accept
Bhagavad-gétä without interpretation, without deletion and without our own
whimsical participation in the matter. The Gétä should be taken as the most

perfect presentation of Vedic knowledge. Vedic knowledge is received from
transcendental sources, and the first words were spoken by the Lord Himself.
The words spoken by the Lord are called apauruñeya, meaning that they are
different from words spoken by a person of the mundane world who is infected
with four defects. A mundaner (1) is sure to commit mistakes, (2) is invariably
illusioned, (3) has the tendency to cheat others and (4) is limited by imperfect
senses. With these four imperfections, one cannot deliver perfect information
of all-pervading knowledge.
Vedic knowledge is not imparted by such defective living entities. It was
imparted unto the heart of Brahmä, the first created living being, and Brahmä
in his turn disseminated this knowledge to his sons and disciples, as he
originally received it from the Lord. The Lord is pürëam, all-perfect, and there
is no possibility of His becoming subjected to the laws of material nature. One
should therefore be intelligent enough to know that the Lord is the only
proprietor of everything in the universe and that He is the original creator,
the creator of Brahmä. In the Eleventh Chapter the Lord is addressed as
prapitämaha [Bg. 11.39] because Brahmä is addressed as pitämaha, the
grandfather, and He is the creator of the grandfather. So no one should claim
to be the proprietor of anything; one should accept only things which are set
aside for him by the Lord as his quota for his maintenance.
There are many examples given of how we are to utilize those things which
are set aside for us by the Lord. This is also explained in Bhagavad-gétä. In the
beginning, Arjuna decided that he should not fight in the Battle of
Kurukñetra. This was his own decision. Arjuna told the Lord that it was not
possible for him to enjoy the kingdom after killing his own kinsmen. This
decision was based on the body because he was thinking that the body was
himself and that his bodily relations or expansions were his brothers, nephews,
brothers-in-law, grandfathers and so on. Therefore he wanted to satisfy his
bodily demands. Bhagavad-gétä was spoken by the Lord just to change this
view, and at the end Arjuna decides to fight under the directions of the Lord
when he says, kariñye vacanaà tava [Bg. 18.73]: “I shall act according to Your
word.”
In this world men are not meant for quarreling like cats and dogs. Men

must be intelligent to realize the importance of human life and refuse to act
like ordinary animals. A human being should realize the aim of his life, and
this direction is given in all Vedic literatures, and the essence is given in
Bhagavad-gétä. Vedic literature is meant for human beings, not for animals.
Animals can kill other living animals, and there is no question of sin on their
part, but if a man kills an animal for the satisfaction of his uncontrolled taste,
he must be responsible for breaking the laws of nature. In the Bhagavad-gétä it
is clearly explained that there are three kinds of activities according to the
different modes of nature: the activities of goodness, of passion and of
ignorance. Similarly, there are three kinds of eatables also: eatables in
goodness, passion and ignorance. All of this is clearly described, and if we
properly utilize the instructions of Bhagavad-gétä, then our whole life will
become purified, and ultimately we will be able to reach the destination which
is beyond this material sky. [Bg. 15.6]
