https://github.com/MicrosoftLearning/PL-300-Microsoft-Power-BI-Data-Analyst.ko-kr/tree/main/Allfiles
PIVOT:
PIVOT rotates a table-valued expression by turning the unique values from one column in the expression into multiple columns in the output.

A good data model offers the following benefits:

Data exploration is faster.
Aggregations are simpler to build.
Reports are more accurate.
Writing reports takes less time.
Reports are easier to maintain in the future.

Providing set rules for what makes a good data model is difficult because all data is different, and the usage of that data varies. 
Generally, a smaller data model is better because it performs faster and will be simpler to use. However, defining what a smaller
data model entails is equally as problematic because it's a heuristic and subjective concept.

Typically, a smaller data model is composed of fewer tables and fewer columns in each table that the user can see.
If you import all necessary tables from a sales database, but the total table count is 30 tables, the user will
not find that intuitive. Collapsing those tables into five tables make the data model more intuitive to the user,
whereas if the user opens a table and finds 100 columns, they might find it overwhelming. Removing unneeded columns
to provide a more manageable number increases the likelihood that the user reads all column names. To summarize,
you should aim for simplicity when designing your data models.

Data Model Reference:
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/design-model-power-bi/1-introduction

Varieties in data:
-------------
Temporal Data   : Data with a time component attatched to it. Example - Opening and Closing values of a stock in a year.
Topical Data    : Data connected with topics. Example :Feedback from customers.
Geospatial Data : Data with a physical location as an attribute.
Network Data    : Data in the form of nodes and links between nodes. Ex: Social network data.
Tree Data       : Data which is basically a network data but with some hierarchy in it.
-------------

Generally, data can be of two types:
1. Qualitative/Categorical Data: Data that deals with characteristics and descriptions. It is further categorised as:
Binary: Data that is dichotomous. For example, True/False, Yes/No, 1/0 etc.
Nominal: Data with no ordering or ranking. For example, different colors, blood groups, nationality etc.
Ordinal: Data with specific order or ranking. For example, height (short, medium, tall), income (low, medium, high), etc.

2. Quantitative/Numerical Data: Data that is numerical in nature and can be measured. It is further categorised as:
Discrete: Data that can be counted (whole numbers). For example, number of floors in a building, number of students in a classroom, etc.
Continuous: Data that can take any value within a range. For example, weight, mileage of a car, etc.
